MEDIATION ACT, 2023 (India)

Source: https://www.indiacode.nic.in/handle/123456789/17124

PREAMBLE:
An Act to promote, encourage and facilitate mediation especially institutional mediation for resolution of disputes, commercial or otherwise, and to enforce mediation settlement agreements, and to provide for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.

SECTION 1 - SHORT TITLE AND COMMENCEMENT:
(1) This Act may be called the Mediation Act, 2023.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.

SECTION 2 - DEFINITIONS:
In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires:
(a) "Mediation" means the process by which a mediation party and the opposite party attempt to reach an amicable settlement of their dispute with the assistance of a mediator.
(b) "Mediator" means a person who is appointed to be a mediator under this Act.
(c) "Mediation settlement agreement" means an agreement in writing resulting from mediation.
(d) "Mediation institution" means an institution designated as such under this Act.

SECTION 3 - APPLICATION:
(1) This Act shall apply to mediation conducted in India:
(a) in respect of disputes where all parties reside in India;
(b) in respect of disputes where at least one party resides in India.
(2) It shall also apply to international mediation subject to provisions of this Act.

SECTION 4 - PRE-LITIGATION MEDIATION:
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, the parties may agree to undergo pre-litigation mediation before filing any suit or proceeding in any court.
(2) Where the Central Government or State Government notifies any category of disputes for mandatory pre-litigation mediation, the parties shall undergo such mediation.

SECTION 5 - REFERENCE TO MEDIATION BY COURT/TRIBUNAL:
(1) A court or tribunal may refer parties to mediation at any stage of proceedings if it considers that mediation is appropriate.
(2) Such reference shall not be made if the parties have already undergone mediation.

SECTION 6 - APPOINTMENT OF MEDIATOR:
(1) The parties may agree on a mediator.
(2) If they fail to agree, the mediation institution or court may appoint a mediator.
(3) The mediator shall be impartial and independent.

SECTION 7 - DISCLOSURE BY MEDIATOR:
(1) A mediator shall disclose any circumstances that may give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality.
(2) Such disclosure shall be made in writing before appointment or as soon as such circumstances arise.

SECTION 8 - CHALLENGE TO MEDIATOR:
(1) A mediator may be challenged only if circumstances exist that give rise to justifiable doubts as to his independence or impartiality.
(2) The challenge procedure shall be as agreed by parties or as determined by mediation institution.

SECTION 9 - CONDUCT OF MEDIATION:
(1) The mediator shall conduct mediation in an independent, impartial and fair manner.
(2) The mediator may meet jointly or separately with the parties.
(3) The mediator shall assist parties in reaching an amicable settlement.

SECTION 10 - ROLE OF MEDIATOR:
(1) The mediator shall facilitate communication between parties.
(2) The mediator shall not impose any settlement on the parties.
(3) The mediator may suggest options but parties are free to accept or reject.

SECTION 11 - COMMENCEMENT OF MEDIATION:
(1) Mediation commences on the date when parties agree to mediate or on the date of first mediation session.
(2) Where court refers parties, mediation commences on the date of such reference.

SECTION 12 - TIME LIMIT FOR MEDIATION:
(1) Mediation shall be completed within a period of one hundred and twenty days from the date of first appearance before mediator.
(2) The parties may extend this period by a further period of sixty days by mutual consent.

SECTION 13 - TERMINATION OF MEDIATION:
(1) Mediation shall terminate:
(a) by execution of mediation settlement agreement;
(b) by written declaration of mediator that further mediation is not justified;
(c) by written declaration of parties to the effect that mediation has failed;
(d) if no settlement is reached within time limit.

SECTION 14 - MEDIATION SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT:
(1) A mediation settlement agreement shall be in writing.
(2) It shall be signed by the parties and authenticated by the mediator.
(3) It shall be final and binding on the parties.

SECTION 15 - ENFORCEMENT OF MEDIATION SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT:
(1) A mediation settlement agreement shall be enforced in accordance with the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 as if it were a decree of court.
(2) An agreement reached through court-annexed mediation shall be enforceable as a decree.

SECTION 16 - REGISTRATION OF MEDIATION SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT:
(1) The parties may register the mediation settlement agreement with the mediation institution.
(2) Registered agreements shall be maintained in a confidential manner.

SECTION 17 - CONFIDENTIALITY OF MEDIATION:
(1) The mediation proceedings including all communications shall be confidential.
(2) The mediator shall not disclose any information shared during mediation except:
(a) with consent of parties;
(b) where required by law;
(c) for purposes of enforcing settlement agreement.

SECTION 18 - PRIVILEGE AGAINST DISCLOSURE:
(1) No person shall disclose any information obtained during mediation in any proceeding.
(2) This privilege does not apply to information necessary for enforcement of settlement agreement.

SECTION 19 - ADMISSIBILITY OF EVIDENCE:
(1) No evidence of anything said or done during mediation shall be admissible in any proceeding.
(2) This does not apply to the mediation settlement agreement itself.

SECTION 20 - IMMUNITY OF MEDIATOR:
(1) A mediator shall not be liable for any act or omission in good faith during mediation.
(2) This immunity extends to mediation institutions.

SECTION 21 - MEDIATION COUNCIL OF INDIA:
(1) The Central Government shall constitute the Mediation Council of India.
(2) The Council shall regulate mediation institutions and mediators.
(3) The Council shall maintain panels of mediators.

SECTION 22 - STANDARDS FOR MEDIATORS:
(1) The Council shall prescribe standards for accreditation of mediators.
(2) Mediators shall undergo periodic training.
(3) The Council may recognize mediation training institutes.

SECTION 23 - ONLINE MEDIATION:
(1) Mediation may be conducted online including through computer networks, video conferencing, or other electronic means.
(2) Online mediation shall have the same legal status as in-person mediation.
(3) The Central Government may prescribe rules for online mediation.

SECTION 24 - COSTS OF MEDIATION:
(1) The costs of mediation shall be borne by the parties as agreed.
(2) In the absence of agreement, costs shall be shared equally.
(3) The mediator may apportion costs in a fair manner.

SECTION 25 - LIMITATION:
(1) The period during which mediation is ongoing shall not be counted for purposes of limitation under the Limitation Act, 1963.
(2) This applies from the date of commencement of mediation till its termination.

SECTION 26 - POWER TO MAKE RULES:
The Central Government may, by notification, make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.

SECTION 27 - POWER TO REMOVE DIFFICULTIES:
If any difficulty arises in giving effect to the provisions of this Act, the Central Government may make such provisions not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act as may appear to be necessary for removing the difficulty.

SECTION 28 - REPEAL AND SAVINGS:
(1) The provisions of this Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law.
(2) The provisions of this Act are in addition to and not in derogation of any other law.

KEY PRINCIPLES:
- Voluntary process (with exceptions for notified categories)
- Confidentiality is paramount
- Settlement agreements are enforceable as court decrees
- Online mediation is legally recognized
- Mediators have immunity for good faith acts
- Limitation period is tolled during mediation
- Pre-litigation mediation is encouraged and can be mandated by government notification
